
ESRC Impact Acceleration Account (IAA)
Application Form: Project Co-Creation Fund

This form is for those applying to the Project Co-Creation Fund separate forms are available for the three other ESRC IAA funding streams. Please refer to the ESRC Impact Acceleration Account Handbook for guidance. You are encouraged to discuss potential ideas with the IAA team (ESRC-IAA@exeter.ac.uk) before applying.
Completed applications should be submitted to: ESRC-IAA@exeter.ac.uk
Maximum application length of 6 Pages. Font (Arial) should be no smaller than 11pt.
Please submit as a pdf.
PRINCIPAL APPLICANT

Name
David Reinstein
Department
Economics
E-mail
d.reinstein@exeter.ac.uk
Telephone
01392432036
ACADEMIC CO-APPLICANT

PLEASE LIST KEY EXTERNAL PARTNERS – Please provide a letter or letters of support from key external partners.

Name
Centre for Effective Altruism/Giving What We Can; Contact: George Howlitt, Corporate fundraising
Name
Founder’s Pledge; Contact: Ieva Kajokaite, Head of Strategic Partnerships
Name
Charities Aid Foundation; Contact:  Susan Pinkney, Head of Research
DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIVITIES

Title
Innovations in fundraising
Start date
1 October 2016
End date (If this is later than a year after the application submission deadline, please provide justification in the summary section)
1 April 2018
Aims





We are applying to engage with large employers and key players in corporate fundraising to disseminate research findings, and encourage pilots and trials of key innovations stemming from our primary research findings. We plan to:
1. Engage banks, investment firms and fundraisers, individually and in small groups, to discuss goals, processes, and opportunities for promoting employee giving in innovative ways.
2. Hold meetings and focus groups to identify the necessary requirements and potential obstacles to implementing and testing systems allowing employees to commit potential incentive pay (bonuses) to to charity.
3. Run pilots and controlled  trials of this ‘Give if You Win’ innovation, and other potential innovations.
4.  Work to amplify the influence of our research through co-designed ‘best practice’ reports and accesible dissemination materials.
4. Translate research results to a wider context, to identify opportunities for impact.
DETAILS OF EXISTING RESEARCH

Please list the publications/outputs upon which this application builds
[1] Kellner, Reinstein, & Riener (2015), “Giving and Probability”. Univ. of Essex DP.
[2] Reinstein (2012), “Does One Contribution Come at the Expense of Another?...”, B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol. 11: Iss. 1 (Advances), Article 40.
[3] Reinstein & Riener (2012), “Reputation and Influence in Charitable Giving: An Experiment.” Theory and Decision, Vol. 72, Issue 2.
[4]. Reinstein & Riener (2012), “Decomposing Desert and Tangibility Effects in a Charitable Giving Experiment”, Experimental Economics, Volume 15, Issue 1.
[5] Reinstein (2014) “The Economics of the Gift” in: Gift giving and the “embedded” economy in the ancient world, ed. Carlà and Gori, Univ. Winter Heidelberg.
[6] Reinstein, Sanders, Tupper (2014), “...The effect of social cues on a fundraising campaign in a government agency. A field experiment” (CMPO DP).
Please give a brief summary of your research upon which this application builds
Our previous work [1] finds people (and particularly males) commit to donate more when asked to commit ‘if they win’ relative to after they have won. This has important implications for fundraising. Consider an individual  facing an uncertain salary raise, bonus, or investment ‘windfall’. If you ask him in advance to commit ‘if you get this windfall, how much of it will you donate?’ he is likely to be more generous than either (i) if you waited to ask him after he learned and habituated to the windfall or (ii) if you asked him to donate from ‘regular wealth.’ This project also engages Reinstein’s work on willingness to donate from less tangible earnings [4] and reputation motives for giving; each generate relevant hypotheses over ‘give if you win.’ It also follows a line of field experiments involving other-regarding behaviour [6], and relates to key issues in the economics of charitable giving [2,5].
Please state any link to previous IAA work


This follows from work funded with the help of an Impact Cultivation Award with the same title.
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED APPROACH AND ACTIVITIES - Please give a description (maximum 2 pages) of proposed activities and how they will strengthen interaction between your research and user communities to generate impact. Please identify who you will engage with beyond the academic community and why.

Millions of employees anticipate end-of-year bonuses and performance-dependent income, particularly in finance and sales. Before these are announced many are uncertain of what size reward, if any, they will get. Our evidence, and previous rresearch suggests that people may be especially generous if asked to commit in advance: ‘if you win a bonus, how much will you donate to charity?’, or if asked immediately after they win a bonus. ‘Give if you win’ can help make the bonus culture socially acceptable: when bankers succeed, so will charities: a win-win!

With support from this grant, I will work to bring this idea into practice by encouraging fundraisers and employers to adopt this into their employee giving programmes and to run pilots and trials exploring and testing this. I will work with fundraising/payroll giving and third-sector professionals to outline and address legal and administrative hurdles to making GIYW a common practice. We will also explore further avenues for GIYW, including pledges to donate from inheritances and lottery windfalls.

 This project requires a great deal trial and error and canvasing for partners and stakeholders. It is difficult for charities and researchers to work with large corporations; these firms can be secretive about their processes and administration, sceptical of outsiders, and prone to institutional inertia. There may also be internal political barriers. To get a firm to share information, adopt a new approach, or experiment and engage with us as researchers, we need to be saavy, well-prepared, and lucky. In the right case the project will harmonise with the managers’ goals, and can be introduced in a way that it is seen as a net benefit to the firm’s key powers. The more firms we engage with, the more likely we will meet success.

Key activities for impact through getting GIYW implemented and tested, and fostering discussion of GIYW:
Publicise and promote the idea of Give if You Win in the popular and professional media, and in influential academic and policy circles; for example, I aim to speak and give workshops at Oxford’s Centre for Effective Altruism, which is working on extending it’s intellectual and academic profile.
Work with the Charitable Aid Foundation and others to clarify and explain the legal environment for Give if You Win from incentive pay and from regular pay (raises); as well as in other environments.
Founders Pledge and Giving What We Can will also be able to offer experiential knowledge; both programmes involve pledges to donate future income; the FP pledges are legally binding.
Prepare material (expanding on our website giveifyouwin.org) to explain the idea and how it works in legal and administrative context (the Founders Pledge FAQ offers a partial model) to potential users.
Engage allies and collaborators in Professional Fundraising, particularly the Charities Aid Foundation; have them offer GIYW as a formal mechanism and adopt it as an informal approach; encourage them to write about this in their communications and social media
Work with social movement leaders, particular.y Effective Altruism/Giving What we can and the Founder’s pledge, to find allies within firms who will serve as advocates for this idea and give us crucial access
Presenting the idea within firms (especially City/financial firms), get feedback from meetings, surveys, and focus groups.
Where possible, propose an agenda and a timetable for testing or implementing GIYW. This may involve working with HR/Payroll, CSR and Employee Giving, IT, and Accounting divisions within firms.
Work with CAF or other PFOs and Payroll Giving Associations to prepare a bespoke analysis and build tools and guidelines for implementing this in an interested firm
Apply for further funding from government and third-sector organisations to help cover the costs of hiring outside experts and adminstrators to help develop  these systems
Analysing data from firms trials of GIYW, and helping write internal reports and external press releases, and working to publicise these. This analysis will also feed into academic research.

I have been working with two students (hired as Student Campus Partners) to prepare material promoting this idea, to gather a list of contacts and potential partners and do background research and to arrange meetings with these partners to exchange ideas, pursue  further engagement, and plan potential trials. I have previously hired these students for 100 hours each; one of the students has struggled to make headway, while the other has been very productive. This funding will permit me to hire more students (and for more hours), to further these activities and provide critical assistance in engaging with firms and facilitating trials.


WHAT IS THE CURRENT POSITION OF YOUR COLLABORATION? For example: how long it has been in existence? what synergies or gaps do you believe you have identified? Please note that you should provide a letter of support from your non-academic collaborator (s).

I have developed several important relationships which will further this project.  In particular:

Founders Pledge:   The Founders Pledge is a nonprofit that asks tech entrepreneurs who have yet to ‘cash out’ to make a legally-binding commitment to donate 2% of their potential proceeds to a social cause of their choice. I have spoken with Ieva Kajokaite, Head of Strategic Partnerships, and met with her and her colleagues on 12 September.

Founders Pledge is already a form of Give if You Win.  I will work with  this organisation and  encourage them to cite and raise awareness of (our) academic evidence in promoting the pledge. They are also interested  in gathering evidence on the success of different approaches, and I aim to work closely with them in analysing this.


Centre for Effective Altruism: The CEA,  based in Oxford, is a nonprofit  that seeks to get people to commit money and resources towards charities that are most effective at alleviating the world’s poverty.  One of their key initiatives is the Giving What we Can Pledge ‘committing members to donate at least 10% of their incomes to relieve the suffering caused by extreme poverty.’  A current priority is corporate engagement and workplace giving; I have spoken with George Howlett, who is spearheading this. He has giving a conditional commitment to work together on this initiative.  Both of us are keen to engage employers, particularly City firms, to enable and promote giving in new ways, and to test  the effectiveness of this. I have also spoken with Michelle Hutchinson, Executive Director of CEA; she is planning to invite me for a talk or workshop at their centre in Oxford.


EXPECTED OUTPUTS AND OUTCOMES (With a primary focus on non-academic outputs)





KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND MEASURES OF SUCCESS - You should consider what changes you would expect to see as a result of your work or what benefits there would be to an end-user organisation, and how you would collect evidence of the impact of this.




OUTLINE THE ETHICAL ISSUES AND/OR SAFETY IMPLICATIONS OF THE PROPOSED WORK AND HOW YOU WILL MANAGE THESE ASPECTS OF THE PROJECT



 RESOURCES REQUESTED - please provide details under each sub-heading. Costs should be approved by the relevant College Research and Finance Team. All funds must be spent by the dates detailed above. NB: You may supply a budget in an appendix but please note that this section must also be completed with indicative figures.



ESRC IAA
In-Kind/Cash match funding
Project Total
Direct staff costs (including superannuation & NI)






Travel & subsistence






Meetings (including venue hire and refreshments)






External contractors






Other (please explain)






Total (ESRC IAA total must not exceed £20,000)






 JUSTIFICATION FOR RESOURCES REQUESTED - Please provide a brief justification for the resources requested above this includes a breakdown of each budget line indicating how you calculated this figure




DETAILS OF MATCH FUNDING AND/OR IN-KIND CONTRIBUTION FROM PARTNERS - Please state whether these are in-kind or cash and specify which partner is making the contribution  (NB: this may be a college in-kind contribution for staff time)








DECLARATION

I confirm that I have read the guidance notes for ESRC IAA funding, that the information given in this application is accurate to the best of my knowledge and that this application has been checked by my college’s Research and Finance team.  If awarded funding, l commit to provide a brief final report as outlined in the guidance notes.
Lead Applicant Name …………………………………………………….…………………….…….
Date ………………………………………………………………………………………………………
I confirm that the costings have been processed through the appropriate college procedures
Associate College Manager for Research…………………………………………………………
Date……………………………………………………………………………………………………...
I confirm that I support the applicant and the work they will be required to undertake if they are successful in their bid.  By signing this application form I agree that the college will cover any overspend of this project.
Associate Dean for Research…………………………………………………………………….
Date…………………………………………………………………………………………………….


